=head1 NAME

DBIx::Class::Manual::DocMap - What documentation do we have?

=head1 Manuals

=over 4

=item L<DBIx::Class::Manual> - User's Manual overview.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Manual::FAQ> - Frequently Asked Questions, gathered from IRC and the mailing list.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Manual::Intro> - Introduction to setting up and using DBIx::Class.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Manual::Example> - Full example Schema.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Manual::Cookbook> - Various short recipes on how to do things.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Manual::Troubleshooting> - What to do if things go wrong (diagnostics of known error messages).

=item L<DBIx::Class::Manual::Component> - How to write your own DBIx::Class components.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Manual::Glossary> - What do all those terms mean?

=back

=head1 Setting up

=over 4

=item L<DBIx::Class::Schema> - Overall schemas, and connection container.

=item L<DBIx::Class::ResultSource> - Source/Table definition functions.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Relationship> - Simple relationships.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Relationship::Base> - Relationship details.

=item L<DBIx::Class::PK::Auto> - Magically retrieve auto-incrementing fields.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Core> - Set of standard components to load.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Serialize::Storable> - ?

=item L<DBIx::Class::InflateColumn> - Making objects out of your columns.

=item L<DBIx::Class::InflateColumn::DateTime> - Magically turn your datetime or timestamp columns into DateTime objects.

=item L<DBIx::Class::PK> - Dealing with primary keys.

=item L<DBIx::Class::ResultSourceProxy::Table> - Turns the resultsource into a table.

=item L<DBIx::Class::AccessorGroup> - Accessor grouping.

=back

=head1 Retrieving and creating data

=over 4

=item L<DBIx::Class::ResultSet> - Selecting and manipulating sets.

=item L<DBIx::Class::ResultSetColumn> - Perform operations on entire columns of a ResultSet.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Row> - Dealing with actual data.

=item L<DBIx::Class::Storage::DBI> - Storage using L<DBI> and L<SQL::Abstract>.

=back
